# ml-algebra-auto-optimiser
All AI models seem to produce higher quality outputs over time for less parameters. This seems to be in part due to increased quality and quantity of training data, but mainly due to improvements to the model architecture itself. Interestingly, these improved architectures still almost entirely use linear algebra along with its structures and operations. As there are infinite algebras, along with their infinite possible structures and operations, there is an effectively infinite space of architectures to model.
## Problem
GPUs are heavily optimised for linear algebra, and thus it is computationally inefficient to try run nonstandard algebras. Additionally, this new infinite possibility space of algebras requires some pressure to optimise along otherwise will never converge.
## Proposed Solution
Given that most ML models are fundamentally designed to learn to approximate complex structure, one could try training ML models on datasets of inputs and outputs for any algebraic operator and thus learn to mimic it, and this can be bootstrapped from computing with pre-existing slower but mathematically complete methods and comparing inputs and outputs as a cost function, thus acting somewhat analogous to a taylor series but for more complex algebras.

Thus, rather than require new specialised chip architecture we could virtualise the algebras themselves to run on GPUs in the same way CPUs ended up virtualising servers into VMs. You could effectively create containerised blackbox MLs that act as new abstracted operators that sit on existing GPUs. The ML can then tune these themselves along with the model during training. The model can train using regular loss functions on these architectures, and the architectures themselves could be trained/optimised using a new loss function. This new loss function, should focus on compute cost, or model/compute complexity, or even just the number of parameters required to store the model weights. 
## The Exciting Part
Furthermore, this method can be extended to investigate and model operators from any novel algebra, even ones not yet explored (which is most given the space is boundless), and use the aforementioned complexity cost function to automatically evaluate the efficiency of the new algebras themselves and their suitability for the desired task, ie what about dot products that take 3 vectors as an operand and combine them in some novel way, etc.
## Possible Issues
The space of algebras being infinite means most are useless, so convergence and global optimisation are issues. It goes against the idea, but maybe add a method to build in known options as toggles such as commutativity and associativity etc etc. The model could also find a way to intelligently pick starting weights, but this would ideally be phased out to allow far away global optimals to be investigated. Additionally, the overhead of algebra virtualisation may outweigh the benefits it yields. If the method seems promising, however, this could be used as a case study to motivate development of specialised chips that are more optimised to new algebras. 

Additionally, given most algebras are likely unuseful, and given how many there are to search through, this method of searching may be fundamentally inefficient regardless. Also, the properties of linear algebra itself (linearity constraints and what this leads to like composability and continuous differentiability) may be so fundamental to ML that other algebras fail to provide upsides without breaking what makes ML so solvable in the first place. Thus, it may be that linear algebra is almost a kind of tailor made algebra for ML in itself. The algebra search space could be partially collapsed by enforcing the properties of linear algebra as a starting point, and extending it with new operators, and later possibly removing symmetries and replacing them with looser ones. However, it is likely that for cost functions to make sense, any algebra would need to be composable and continuously differentiable, as a starting point. Interestingly, different steps of the model could use different algebras, as long as there is some way to cleanly backpropagate throughout.
## TLDR
The widespread/near universal use of linear algebra for ML seems to be driven by the fact that the algebra itself appears to be tailor made for ML and thus an optimal choice. Linear algebra is a good choice for ML, and offers many benefits, but at least some part of its benefits lies in its convenience, which ideally should not remain a limiting factor in testing alternative options. This convenience seems to be due to three main factors, which all have solutions:
* Bias towards use of linear algebra due to unfamiliarity with alternate algebras
* The origins of ML in linear algebra
  * These above two are solved through the ML itself designing and optimising around unfamiliar algebras, in a way that does not require human understanding ie most ML is a blackbox anyway with little insight into internal workings, this just generalises a layer further to the space the model exists in itself as an optimisable problem rather than just the problem itself
* The fact that GPUs are widespread, and optimised for parallel tensor math
  * The process of letting GPUs find a way to compute novel operations using accuracy and compute complexity as costs in a loss function aims to mitigate this. This is somewhat analogous to taylor series approximations, where the operation doesnt have to be perfect, it just has to be a good enough approximation while saving enough compute to justify the accuracy loss. Multiple computationally efficient but rougher ML operator approximators could be run in parallel and averaged, for example.
These combined provide the necessary framework to explore the idea without needing years of research into novel algebras or specialised compute as it automatically searches the space of algebras while finding optimised methods to run novel operations on existing compute. These will allow proper evaluation of whether more optimised algebras exist for ML.
## Further Development
To validate the idea, this should be tested on some computationally small yet still complex, well defined problem such as MNIST. However, the overhead to results ratio may be nonlinear ie this may only start to become useful on significantly more complex problems.
### Note
This idea was developed independently while sitting around bored drinking english breakfast in the afternoon waiting for YOLOv8 to run detections on a dataset. Research will be done to check if this approach is novel and to further develop the idea if not yet done.
